# GIANT
Genome-wide identification of somatic aberrations from normal-tumor samples

--------------------------
Introduction
===========
Cancer genome often encompasses numerous of aberrations originated during tumorigenesis, which play an important role in tumor evolution and progression. Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping array technique provides a great opportunity to profile the genomic aberrations with high resolution, but sophisticated computational methods are sorely needed for accurately recognizing genomic aberrations from genotyping signals dramatically affected by normal cell contamination, tumor aneuploidy, and GC content. In this study, we introduced a novel bioinformatics toolkit — GIANT, for dissecting paired normal-tumor SNP-array data. GIANT mainly consists of two components: 1) a statistical model called PSHMM(paired samples hidden Markov model), which is designed to identify somatic aberrations in tumor sample by borrowing the genotype information of paired normal sample; 2) genome-wide permutation test for discovering statistically significant aberrations across the cancer genome.

---------------------------
Recent Update
========
2013/5/16: Additional files of GIANT article are available from here.
2013/5/16: The poster of GIANT in RECOMB2013 can be viewed from here.
2013/3/4: GIANT website is released with 1.0 version.
2013/3/4: GIANT is accepted for poster section in RECOMB 2013, Beijing. The abstract can be viewed from here. 
2013/1/20: GIANT website is released with beta version.

---------------------------
System requirement
========
At less 4 GB RAM, about 2 times of data file size in free space

---------------------------
Download and installation
========
Two GIANT software packages are available: 
- 1, Pcode version, which requires MATLAB installed on user’s computer, can be downloaded from (here). The detail of the directory structure of pcode version GIANT is shown below:
     --config
               --xxx.pfb % population frequency of B allele data file. Provided by GIANT.
               --xxx.gcmodel % GC content data file. Provided by GIANT.
     --data
             -- … % the input SNP-array data file. Both normal and tumor data should be stored in this directory. Provided by users.
     --util
               -- … % the GIANT components pcode files.
     --results
               --… % the GIANT result directory. Several file or directory will be generated after running GIANT.
     --GIANT_pshmm.p % the main PSHMM pcode file.
     --GIANT_sigTest.p % the main significant test pcode file.
     --list.txt % Normal-tumor SNP-array data configuration list file. Provided by users.
     --Tumor_Summary.txt % the summary information of all tumor SNP-array files, generated by PSHMM 
     --Normal_Summary.txt % the summary information of all normal SNP-array files, generated by PSHMM
- 2, Deployed version for window 64 bit OS, can be downloaded from (here). To use this program, users need to first setup MATLAB Compiler Runtime (MCR) in user’s computer. The MCRv7.16(windows 64 bit) can be downloaded from here. The directory structure is described as follow: 
     --config
               --xxx.pfb % population frequency of B allele data file. Provided by GIANT.
               --xxx.gcmodel % GC content data file. Provided by GIANT.
     --data
             -- … % the input SNP-array data file. Both normal and tumor data should be stored in this directory. Provided by users.
     --util
               -- … % the GIANT components pcode files
     --results
               --… % the GIANT result directory. Several file or directory will be generated after running GIANT.
     --GIANT_pshmm.exe % the main PSHMM execution file.
     --GIANT_sigTest.exe % the main significant test execution file.
     --list.txt % Normal-tumor SNP-array data configuration list file. Provided by users.
     --Tumor_Summary.txt % the summary information of all tumor SNP-array files, generated by PSHMM.
     --Normal_Summary.txt % the summary information of all normal SNP-array files, generated by PSHMM.

Both two packages can be used after extracted from ZIP file without installation. To avoid an unexpected running error, please do not change the directory structure or directory and file name after extraction.

---------------------------
Usage
========
After downloading and extracting GIANT software packages (for deploy version, MCR is needed to be installed in computer), Three steps are need to run the GIANT:
************************************************************************
<1>, move the paired SNP-array data files into data directory.
************************************************************************
<2>, modify the list file to assign the normal-tumor sample, also appended with valid tumor content range. 
************************************************************************
<3>, execute the command to run the GIANT-PSHMM. 

1.For the Pcode version GIANT, the command is like:

     GIANT_pshmm('DataDir','ResultDir','ListFile');

     DataDir: the path of normal and tumor SNP-array data directory, for example, ./data
     ResultDir: The path of output result directory, for example, ./result
     ListFile: the path of the configuration list file, for example, ./list.txt
     (User can also see "example.m" from GIANT package for detail)

2.For the deploy version GIANT, the command is like:

     GIANT_pshmm.exe DataDir ResultDir ListFile

     DataDir: the path of normal and tumor SNP-array data directory, for example, “C:\\GIANT\\data”
     ResultDir: The path of output result directory, for example, “C:\\GIANT\\result”
     ListFile: the path of the configuration list file, for example, “C:\\GIANT\\list.txt”
     (User can also see "example.bat" from GIANT package for detail)

************************************************************************
<4>, for multiple samples from the same cancer and SNP-array chip type, execute the command to run the GIANT-SignificantTest. (Note: the input files of GIANT_sigTest are ListFile and normal and tumor genotype files generated from GIANT_pshmm)

1, For the Pcode version GIANT, the command is like:

     GIANT_sigTest('ResultDir','ListFile', Mode);

     ResultDir: The path of output result directory, for example, ./result
     ListFile: the path of the configuration list file, for example, ./list.txt
     Mode: the mode of significant test, 1, 2 and 3 denote amplification, deletion and LOH, respectively.
     (User can also see "example.m" from PSHMM package for detail.)

2, For the deploy version GIANT, the command is like:

     GIANT_sigTest.exe ResultDir ListFile Mode

     ResultDir: The path of output result directory, for example, “C:\\ GIANT \\result”
     ListFile: the path of the configuration list file, for example, “C:\\ GIANT\\list.txt”
     Mode: the mode of significant test, 1, 2 and 3 denote amplification, deletion and LOH, respectively.
     (User can also see "example.bat" from GIANT package for detail.)
     
---------------------------
Reference
========
Ao Li*, Yuanning Liu*, Qihong Zhao, Huanqing Feng, Lyndsay Harris, Minghui Wang. Genome-wide identification of somatic aberrations from paired normal-tumor samples. Submitted.(*: joint first authors)

---------------------------
Contact
========
Ao Li, Associate Professor, Department of Electronic Science and Technology, USTC (aoli at ustc dot edu dot cn )
Yuanning Liu, Graduate Student, Department of Electronic Science and Technology, USTC (lynn100 at mail dot ustc dot edu dot cn )
